Israel's Siege and destruction of Gaza
is a humanitarian catastrophe for its
2.3 million people those are the United
Nations words as it warns that cutting
off water food Fuel and electricity is a
war crime so what can stop such
Collective punishment this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm Tom
McCrae it's been likened to a medieval
Siege a total blockade of one of the
most densely populated areas in the
world while bombing entire neighborhoods
to Rubble Israel has also cut off
supplies no fuel means no power for
generators threatening the lives of the
young old and critically ill who have
managed to make it to hospital under
under Israeli bombardment desination
plants not working effectively means
drinking water is running out and water
mains are damaged food is also running
out and many are suffering hunger Israel
is Accused by the United Nations and
human rights officials of carrying out a
war crime through its Siege but Israel
continues regardless supported by the
United States and many European Union
Nations so what can stop this Collective
punishment of 2.3 million people
We'll be asking this and more of our
guests in just a few moments but first
Hy mmud describes the impact of Israel's
Siege from inside
Gaza people are now hungry or as The
Honorable commissioner has stated the
residents of the Gaza Strip are expected
to face utter disaster in the coming
days caught and trapped in a war zone
the residents of this small territory
are expected to face an unimaginable
suffering as the humanitarian situation
ations are worsening in each passing Day
ad group stated that water supply
sanitation and hygiene facilities have
already been disrupted services to more
than 700 people evacuating from the
northern part Gaza City to the southern
part of the Gaza
[Music]
Strip well joining me now are our guests
in KH Unice in Gaza is Mansour shman a
resident of Gaza in rala is Bushra khi
policy lead in the occupied Palestinian
territory and Israel for Oxfam and in
Bethlehem is raham Jafari a
Communications and advocacy coordinator
for the occupied Palestinian territory
for Action a thank you all very much for
joining us here on Inside Story mono if
I can begin with you you are obviously
living this humanitarian crisis day and
day out there in Gaza we've heard from
the the UN Secretary General who who's
just reiterated that the situation is
getting worse and worse each and every
hour can you just explain exactly where
you are right now and and what the
situation is like in Gaza as it
stands thank you for having the program
and hello to your guests um I'm now
located in N Hospital inun in the south
of the Gaza
Strip um as the UN Secretary General
said I mean I'm wondering how it can get
better right now we have over 8,000
killed 20,000 injured borders are still
closed um until now 50 to 60 trucks have
come in since the last 23 days normally
we expect 400 trucks a day during non
war time chemical attacks on the
residents of Gaza white phosphorus on my
family mosques have been bombed down
churches have been brought to Rubble
hospitals hundreds killed in them while
being treated together with hundreds of
refugees
Israel has has not only not only shut
off the water taps and electricity TAPS
in addition to not allowing any food
coming in but they've also tried to stop
Communication in Gaza inside and to the
outside world the situation is getting
worse and out of
hand Rah I want to talk a little bit
about uh the Looting that we have seen
uh recently for the very first time
since the war broke out we've seen
people so desperate that they have been
forced to go to
un uh depos and and fend for themselves
find the food take it home to feed their
their families how big of a concern is
it that that this is now
happening um thanks and uh so this is um
a very difficult situation and a very
catastrophic situation and and so um
Gaza um is under total blockade and
seeds denying the injury of basic food
items and Fuel and medical supplies and
uh there is no electricity and the
people do not have any safer place to to
go and even the hospitals that under
continuous threat of pumping and uh
evacuation the people do not uh uh know
where to go and there is a humanitarian
catastrophe it is unprecented level of
targeting
civilians it is humanitarian catastrophe
is also it cannot describe the whole
situation in Gaza H so this situation
put a a a more huge pressure on the work
and operation of a humanitarian
organization that cannot ER work or
continue its work under this situation
um where there is no electricity where
is there is no enough Aid entering Gaza
um it around 87 of the humanitarian Aid
truck that entered Gaza for 2.3 million
people this is not sufficient this is
not fair ER and there is no safe access
for
humanitarian uh corridors to enter and
to allow people to to to to reach their
basic needs I mean the water is polluted
and
um the hospitals cannot uh treat with
all the injured and with the wounded
people H they receive from the
continuous pumping that Target Church
Smoke houses uh children women uh so I I
cannot catch all the words to describe
the situation that people our people in
Gaza pass through and so there is an
urgent call and an immediate call to
reach an immediate ceasefire and
immediate pause for this uh for this
huge ER violence against people against
civilian against children in Gaza R
you're not the only one uh not finding
the words to describe what is happening
in Gaza at this point in time buer the
UN warned that civil order uh was
dissolving inside Gaza because of the
pressure that the 2.3 million people
there are under is that what we are
seeing here now I mean if people are
having to I mean you know you have to
understand people Gaza before uh the 7th
of October is a place where there's no
homeless people despite a humanitarian
crisis and living under siege for 16
years there's no crime in Gaza uh that's
not existence so for people to be
looting unwa uh and people that are
dependent on Aiden have always been
dependent on this this is not anything
new for Gins they've been living on the
brink of a humanitarian catastrophe in
the way that we've seen it in the last
few weeks for years because of the
illegal Israeli blockade imposed on Gaza
cutting off Gaza from many basic
supplies um for people to be looting
flour and rice I mean the situation must
be very desperate um and must be you
know and I know from my from myself and
we we've heard our colleagues that's in
um saying that on his own family he's
he's been impacted by the bombardments I
have my own family as well in Gaza they
were sharing cans of tuna so as a Mom
myself I would probably also uh get any
my hands on any type of flow or food to
be able to to feed my children uh it's a
very natural I think and human uh thing
to do uh there's been also very
conflicted reports about this looting
and why that happened
um I had Direct witness testimonies
about this saying that actually it was
bombarded um right after people had
looted it and had been asked to be
evacuated so there are different reports
on that I know that it's not clear
because we're unable to contact anybody
because connection lines have been
completely disrupted so we're not even
able to speak to our colleagues or speak
to to our family to really understand
what is going on uh as the minutes go by
um it's it's terrifying yeah it
certainly it certainly is in that lack
of communication between officials but
also between family members and Friends
living in Gaza monso must also be
extremely difficult uh at this time
we've heard over the last couple of days
that uh this is the first time that
people inside Gaza are really going
hungry that starvation is going to
become a bigger and bigger issue is that
how it feels there now Menor as your
guest mentioned even during the blockade
before this war R is a very safe place I
mean very rarely do you hear of any kind
of um criminal activity happening even a
small scale looting so the fact that the
people had to go to the Strategic
storage in the Ona to uh take flour and
rice to feed their own children and
their own extended families shows you
how much uh of a massive umme
in terms of food and nutrition we are
reaching the sense I getting from the
people living across of my across of
where I am in the four different schools
around 20,000 refugees is that the the
the rations that they are getting are
getting smaller uh the people that need
to be fed are getting larger in numbers
and that even if people have a little
bit of cash on their side they can't
find and buy the food they need so
there's a problem of quality there's a
problem of quantity however even with
all these challenges the people here in
Gazza are trying to keep High morale
they are trying to be practice
steadfastness practice patience and help
each other out as much as they can but
we need the help of the International
Community to open the borders
unequivocally for both sides and all
kinds of Aid to come in as soon as
possible because by today
we should have had count of 23 days
times 400 trucks at least 9,000
containers of Aid which should have
replenished whatever the refugees ate
and drank over the last 23 days
remarkable uh that soar light has gotten
in over the last three weeks raham do
you think that the humanitarian crisis
that's unfolding inside Gaza do you
think that's a deliberate tactic of
Israel or or simply a consequence of
War um so I think that uh if the
humanitarian corridors is not uh opened
and if the uh an immediate Seas fa is
not reached I think the humanitarian
situation and the humanitarian
catastrophe will be separated uh during
the up coming days and uh uh we will
lose many people we many lives will be
lost uh even the patient people who
could who couldn't reach and receive the
medical care they want I think there is
an urgent call to International
Community to the world leader to all the
people to reach h a Seas fire to
practice the pressure on Israel to
adhere to the International Community
and also in this regard I want to
emphasize one point and the main point
that the people in Gaza as your gust
said all the time keep a high moral and
a high adherence to a social cohesion
and respect to the law some families
host more than 50 members of their
relatives and and their friends in one
house and they share everything so and
uh the main problem the main thing that
we want to focus on now is to reach a
Seas fire to open humanitarian Corridor
to allow a humanitarian Aid to in Gaza
and also especially the fuel which is
needed to H for hospitals which is
needed to generate electricity to to to
produce clear water to produce food item
for the people Bakers cannot work
because it can't produce bread which is
a main component for food in Gaza and in
the Middle East so H that the most
priority that we focus on is a
humanitarian and an immediate ceasefire
I think yeah and you are not the only
one so who have been calling for that
and those calls have been growing louder
and louder as the days go on but still
we have yet to see anything along those
lines Bush you work for Oxfam and they
have called uh that the
starvation that has happening in Gaza
now is being used as a weapon of war is
this a war crime it may amount indeed to
a war crime we and I think the
International Community has been very
clear about Israel's duties and
obligations under international law uh
Israel uh block illegally blockades is
uh Gaza has been for the last 16 years
we've been under mil milary occupation
here in the West Bank for 57 years um
and it has obligations under
international law to protect civilian
population and that means provide them
with basic needs including water fuel
electricity and food and medical
supplies when these essential food items
like flour and oil and sugar are
prevented from entering the Gaza Strip
because the borders have been closed or
and or bombed um you know the the you
know it's it's it's clear that um
starvation as a method of warfare has
been used and it's strictly prohibited
by International humanitarian law and as
the occupying Force Israel has an
obligation to ensure the needs of uh and
protection of gaza's population and that
is not currently the case and not to
mention the collective punishment uh as
well manso I want to talk a little bit
about fuel because that is also one of
the biggest problems that is facing
everyone in Gaza at the moment I mean
Israel still refuses uh
to let any into the strip can you just
explain how that affects almost every
part of life
there yes
um the problem right now is that Israel
has cut the main electrical grids off
from G strip since 23 days so people
rely on uh other ways to generate
electricity for for their main function
in life however there are some main
units within razza like hospitals like
clinics like um uh rescue centers fire
departments uh ambulances Etc which rely
very heavily to have electricity and to
have things charged up through
electrical generators that are fed by
Fuel so without
fuel hospitals will stop working people
will die directly as a result of that
without
fuel uh there will be no more internet
connections there will be no more ways
to communicate within each other and
within the outside
world without fuel uh the the the
limited amount of power generation from
solar cell panels and um other methods
is like very very very small and it is
not enough to to to give uh enough power
to the people here fuel here is now
equal to life it is more important than
food and water and if they are worried
that an entity like Hamas will be
controlling this fuel then I urge them
to ensure that it it is being directed
uh properly as uh through organizations
such as the red crescent Red Cross the
Ona Etc in order for them to direct it
to where they believe is the right place
uh the fuel needs to enter as soon as
possible or we are committing 2.3
million residents to
death raham Aid uh action Aid obviously
works extensively right throughout Gaza
I mean eight agencies there are now
having to make extremely difficult calls
about the limited amount of fuel that
they have and where the priorities lie
whether it should go to ambulances to to
to get the injured back to hospital
whether to keep incubators uh or
generators running whether to send it to
Bakery so food can be made to feed
people how difficult is that for someone
that works for an aid agency just having
to make those types of
calls as your guest mentioned that fuel
is important for everything it's a life
saving it's similar to water and food H
without fuel we cannot produce water we
cannot clear water H for human
consumtion without fuel we cannot work
ambulances we cannot move also ER if
fuel is needed if if fuel is not uh
available I think our work will be
embeded and also we try as much as we
can with limited capacities on the
ground to H to try to help the people
that there but uh under the also the
lack of safety The Continuous pumping
and the severe shortage of fuel uh our
work is embeded uh our movement is
embeded uh also so H fuel is is
essentially needed and is essentially
needed to enter now Gaz and now mean yes
it's not just about Aid getting through
the rougher Crossing though is it but
can you just help explain to people that
might not fully understand it that how
Israel controls uh Power and Water and
to Gaza that that doesn't necessarily
have to come in on trucks does
it no I mean it doesn't and also I mean
it's important to say you asked a very
important question like how do we make
that call well actually we wouldn't have
to make that call if parties were
abiding by their duties and obligations
under international law both parties by
the way um uh uh on the on the on the
blockade on Gaza and and and what gazin
have had to endure for the last 16 years
uh the block was deemed illegal by the
international court of justice a few
years ago in an advisory opinion um uh
Israel of course control the Israeli
borders there's only 1% of gazans before
the 7th of October that could come in
and out of Gaza um and humanitarian Aid
and workers of course but you know also
on top of this blockade um there were
six escalations in the last 10 years and
every time there has been an escalation
in Gaza the borders were Force
forcefully closed so um clearly there is
that type of control um from Israel uh
it claims to not have control over the
Border but that's incorrect because it
gets to close and open the Border
whenever it chooses to um and it also
bombarded ra I mean in the few the first
few days of of of this this current
escalation and hosti um in terms of
water and electricity actually Gaza buys
most of its water or at least half of it
uh by from a Israeli company that
provides water for it same thing it buys
electricity from the Israeli grids and
uh and you know uh compensates with
solar uh with solar panels and fuel um
uh from the for the power plant so uh
they are dependent on these Resources by
Israel and the fact that these can be
shut off uh each time isn't I mean is
you know it is a serious violation of
interational Law and may well uh amount
to a war crime yes
indeed Mano I'm not too sure if you've
been able to see uh from within Gaza
over the the last week or so rallies uh
shows of solidarity with Palestinians
have been growing larger and larger
right around the world then there were
more than a million people turned out in
Istanbul hundreds and hundreds of
thousands of people in London uh turned
out to to walk uh along the streets
there protesting what is happening
inside inside Gaza how important is it I
mean I know it doesn't actually change
the situation but how important is it
for people to put pressure especially on
the western governments that have sided
with Israel here how important is it
from someone sitting inside Gaza to see
that and I guess for people to keep that
up um honestly uh whenever the people
here have access to social media and
they see the demonstrations all around
the world trying to support the cause of
the Palestinian people here in Gaza
trying to put pressure on their
governments to help ease the pressure on
us here their Spirits get lifted on
behalf of the 2.3 million people here
living in razza I want to thank each and
every one of you who goes to these
demonstrations who writes letters to the
government officials who puts pressure
in different ways in peaceful manners to
try to apply the basic human rights that
are imprint in the UN on the civilians
here inaz that have been going through
escalating hell over the last 23
days raham we began this uh program by
asking uh one question one that's very
difficult to answer because no one
seemingly has been able to come up with
one what do you think is actually going
to stop this Collective punishment what
is happening with the siege in
Gaza what will stop this Collective
punish punishment you mean
yes I think there will be there should
be a a strong political will among the
political leader in the world and a huge
pressure on Israel from the
International Community from the UN
bodies and from the
political leaders as mentioned and from
the the the peoples of the world to
continue raising their voices and
demonstrating uh to protest against this
escalation against targeting this
civilian to uh to uh to force Israel to
adhere to International uh to
international law there should be a
collective work a collective action uh
from all governments around the world uh
to uh work together to come together H
to reach uh a SE fire an immediate SE
fire for the people who are being killed
for uh uh for more than 23
days busher do you have any hope at this
point in time that at the very least
we're going to see a humanitarian
ceasefire uh put in place before you
know more and more people die in
Gaza you know um organizations like
Oxfam have been raising the alarm bells
for years on the situation of Gaza and
what we've been calling for is not only
an end to the siege um and of course an
immediate ceasefire that goes without
saying but an end to the siege and for
the International Community to deal with
the root causes of this issue towards
and work towards an a a real time bound
plan um with key accountability
mechanisms for each point of that plan
um uh for a uh towards you know the
Justice um and this towards this
Injustice to resolve this Injustice and
to resolve this violence and we have
been calling that for for years now um
and and and that is also my call and I I
I urge also people to support the call
that came out a couple uh weeks ago by
more than 600 organizations globally
including big International
organizations of one is which one is
alpam uh calling for an immediate
ceasefire but also an entire ceasefire
proposal is part of that open call and
it's garnered now more than half a
million signatures in about a week um we
urge people to continue making that call
for an immediate ceas fire as you said
we have seen it globally uh the street
has spoken and now leaders need to um to
represent their constituents uh they
were uh they represent constituents they
represent these people and they have to
address it it's it's their
responsibility as elected leaders um so
you know we enough of the persistent
failure of the international Community
it is now time and now there's a window
to take real action Manel we have about
one minute left in the program I just
want to ask you uh briefly how angry are
people there about the lack of action
from the International
Community uh people here are channeling
all their emotions into action it's like
a beehive everyone is trying to help uh
to reduce the impact of what is
happening in a in a and and and give in
a positive manner in whatever way they
can to relieve the pressure of the
people here yes people are angry however
they believe that all they can do at
this point is to try and help people
around them to live a better life thank
you so much uh Mansour we uh we really
appreciate it and really uh hope for
your and your family safety there inside
Gaza thank you all three of you uh for
joining us on Al jazer meno Sherman
Bushra khi and RAM Jafari thank you so
much and thank you too for watching you
can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website eler.com and for
further discussion go to our Facebook
page that's
facebook.com AJ insid story you can also
join the conversation on X formally
known as Twitter our handle is AJ insid
story from me Tom McCrae and the whole
team here bye for
now